>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MAY 2:
AS CROWDS RALLIED IN BALTIMORE,
SIX POLICE OFFICERS CHARGED IN
CONNECTION WITH THE DEATH OF
FREDDIE GRAY ARE NOW OUT ON
BAIL.
FROM AFGHANISTAN: DOZENS OF MEN
FACE TRIAL FOR THE MOB KILLING
OF THIS WOMAN MISTAKENLY ACCUSED
OF BURNING THE KORAN.
AND SANDTOWN BY THE NUMBERS.
A SPECIAL SERIES OF REPORTS
ABOUT WHAT LIFE IS LIKE IN THE
IMPOVERISHED BALTIMORE
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE FREDDIE GRAY
GREW UP AND WAS ARRESTED.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT IN BALTIMORE,
WHERE A THRONG OF PEOPLE, SOME
CHANTING "TAKE BACK THE CITY"
AND CALLING FOR AN END TO THE
CURFEW, GATHERED PEACEFULLY
TODAY OUTSIDE CITY HALL.
THIS, FOLLOWING THE RELEASE ON
BAIL LAST NIGHT OF THE SIX
BALTIMORE POLICE OFFICERS, WHO
WERE ARRESTED IN CONNECTION WITH
THE DEATH OF FREDDIE GRAY.
THE 25-YEAR-OLD DIED IN POLICE
CUSTODY, TOUCHING OFF DAYS OF
RIOTS.
FOR THE LATEST FROM BALTIMORE,
WE ARE JOINED ONCE AGAIN TONIGHT
BY LUKE BROADWATER OF THE
"BALTIMORE SUN."
SO, WHAT'S THE TIMETABLE FOR THE
PROSECUTION?
THE CHARGES CAME DOWN VERY
QUICKLY.
WHAT KIND OF A TIMELINE ARE WE
LOOKING FOR NOW THAT WE KNOW
THESE SIX OFFICERS ARE OUT ON
BAIL?
>> FELONY CHARGES IN MARYLAND
HAVE TO GO BEFORE A GRAND JURY,
SO A GRAND JURY IS GOING TO HAVE
TO HEAR THESE CHARGES.
OBVIOUSLY, THAT'S A ONE-SIDE
SITUATION WHERE ONLY THE
PROSECUTION GETS TO PRESENT
EVIDENCE.
THAT WILL HAVE TO HAPPEN WITHIN
30 DAYS.
IF THE GRAND JURY DECIDE TO
BRING CHARGES AGAINST THE
OFFICERS, THEN THEY WILL HAVE AN
ARRAIGNMENT.
SO WE COULD SEE THAT ALL WITHIN
THE NEXT MONTH.
AND AFTER THEY'RE ARRAIGNED,
THEN WE'D LIKELY SEE WHAT THEY
WANT TO PLEA OR GO TO TRIAL.
SO WE-- WE COULD BE-- YOU KNOW,
TRIALS IN BALTIMORE NOTORIOUSLY
TAKE A LONG TIME.
I MEAN, WE SEE POSTPONEMENTS ALL
THE TIMES.
WE'VE SEEN CASES THAT DRAG ON
FOR YEARS AND YEARS AND YEARS.
BUT I THINK WITH THE
HIGH-PROFILE NATURE OF THIS ONE,
I THINK WE WILL BE SEEING THESE
CASES IN COURT PRETTY QUICKLY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THREE OF
THE SIX POLICE OFFICERS INVOLVED
WERE AFRICAN AMERICANS.
HOW IS THAT AFFECTING HOW THIS
STORY IS CONSUMED, PERCEIVED ON
THE STREETS OF BALTIMORE?
>> I WOULD SAY IT MAKES VERY
LITTLE DIFFERENCE.
ALMOST EVERYBODY I TALK TO ON
THE STREET SAYS IT DOESN'T
MATTER TO US WHETHER THE OFFICER
IS WHITE OR BLACK.
WHAT MATTERS TO US IS THAT WE
GET JUSTICE IN THE CASE.
I THINK POTENTIALLY, ESPECIALLY
WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT BIG,
NATIONAL CASES, THE RACE OF THE
OFFICERS SEEMS VERY IMPORTANT TO
MAYBE PEOPLE WHO ARE LOOKING IN
FROM THE OUTSIDE.
BUT ON THE GROUND HERE, I FOUND
ALMOST ENTIRELY PEOPLE SAY THAT
DOES NOT MATTER AT ALL TO THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SO AS THIS--
YOU KNOW, AS YOU POINTED OUT,
THAT THIS CASE COULD DRAG ON FOR
MONTHS OR POSSIBLY LONGER, IS
THE CITY EQUIPPED TO HANDLE
ANOTHER FLARE-UP OR ANOTHER
ROUND OF TENSION GIVEN WHAT
THEY'VE EXPERIENCED OVER THE
PAST COUPLE OF WEEKS?
>> WELL, AS WE SAW ON-- I WOULD
SAY ONLY ONE DAY THIS WEEK DID
WE REALLY NEED THE NATIONAL
GUARD, AND THAT WAS ON MONDAY.
THAT WAS THE DAY ALL HELL BROKE
LOOSE AND THE DAY OF THE RIOT.
THAT DAY, DEFINITELY, THERE WERE
A LOT OF POLICE THAT WERE NEED
ED TO KEEP ORDER IN BALTIMORE.
SINCE THAT DAY, THERE HAS BEEN
NO VIOLENCE AT ALL RELATED TO
THE PROTEST OF THE FREDDIE GRAY
CASE.
WHAT THERE HAS BEEN IS A LOT OF
VIOLENCE THAT HAS NOTHING TO DO
WITH THE FREDDIE GRAY CASE, AND
THAT IS THE NORMAL VIOLENCE THAT
THERE IS IN BALTIMORE.
I MEAN, I THINK WE'VE HAD 17
PEOPLE SHOT SINCE THE NATIONAL
GUARD ARRIVED.
WE JUST HAD A STORE OWNER ROBBED
AND KILLED.
SO WE ARE SEEING VIOLENCE, BUT
IT'S NOT-- IT'S NOT FROM THE
PROTESTERS.
>> Sreenivasan: LUKE
BROADWATER OF THE "BALTIMORE
SUN," THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN OAKLAND
CALIFORNIA LAST NIGHT,
DEMONSTRATORS PROTESTING ALLEGED
POLICE BRUTALITY THREW ROCKS AND
CHAIRS AT POLICE AND SMASHED CAR
WINDOWS AT AUTO DEALERSHIPS.
THE INCIDENTS OCCURRED AFTER
PEACEFUL GATHERINGS TO MARK MAY
DAY.
THERE WAS ALSO TROUBLE IN
SEATTLE.
AT LEAST 15 PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED
THERE AND SEVERAL DOZEN VEHICLES
WERE DAMAGED, ACCORDING TO
AUTHORITIES.
IOWA HAS BECOME THE THIRD STATE
TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY
BECAUSE OF THE GROWING SPREAD OF
THE AVIAN FLU.
IOWA PRODUCES MORE EGGS THAN ANY
OTHER STATE.
GOVERNOR TERRY BRANSTAD'S
DECLARATION GIVES AUTHORITIES
ADDITIONAL POWERS TO ENFORCE
PREVENTATIVE MEASURES.
MINNESOTA AND WISCONSIN TOOK
SIMILAR STEPS LAST MONTH.
AN ESTIMATED 21 MILLION CHICKENS
AND TURKEYS HAVE BEEN OR WILL BE
KILLED NATIONWIDE TO TRY TO CURB
THE OUTBREAK, WHICH DOES NOT
POSE A THREAT TO HUMANS.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS MORE
THAN A MILLION AND A HALF
PEOPLE IN NEPAL ARE IN
IMMEDIATE NEED OF FOOD.
THIS, AS THE DEATH TOLL FROM
LAST WEEKEND'S EARTHQUAKE
CLIMBED TODAY TO MORE THAN
7,000.
AUTHORITIES SAY DELIVERY OF
ASSISTANCE IS ONLY POSSIBLE BY
HELICOPTER TO SOME AREAS OUTSIDE
THE CAPITAL CITY OF KATHMANDU.
WORD FROM NIGERIA TONIGHT OF THE
RESCUE OF ANOTHER 234 WOMEN AND
CHILDREN WHO HAD BEEN TAKEN
CAPTIVE BY BOKO HARAM ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS.
SEVERAL HUNDRED OTHERS WERE
FREED BY THE NIGERIAN ARMY
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
ACCORDING TO THE BBC, IT WAS NOT
IMMEDIATELY CLEAR WHAT
CONNECTION, IF ANY, THOSE
RESCUED TODAY HAD TO THE 219
SCHOOL GIRLS ABDUCTED A LITTLE
MORE THAN A YEAR AGO.
IN AFGHANISTAN, 49 SUSPECTS,
INCLUDING 19 POLICE OFFICERS,
WERE PUT ON TRIAL TODAY IN
CONNECTION WITH THE MOB KILLING
OF AN AFGHAN WOMAN.
THE 27-YEAR-OLD WOMAN WAS
BEATEN, KICKED AND THEN SET ON
FIRE AS SEVERAL POLICEMEN
REPORTEDLY LOOKED ON.
THE CASE DREW NATIONAL ATTENTION
AFTER THE ATTACK WAS CAPTURED ON
A MOBILE PHONE AND DISTRIBUTED
ONLINE.
TODAY'S COURT PROCEEDINGS WERE
TELEVISED NATIONALLY IN
AFGHANISTAN.
AND PRINCE WILLIAM AND KATE
MIDDLETON ARE THE NEW PARENTS OF
A BABY GIRL.
THE UNNAMED NEWBORN WAS
DELIVERED SHORTLY AFTER 8:30 IN
THE MORNING LOCAL TIME IN LONDON
AND WEIGHED IN AT EIGHT POUNDS
AND THREE OUNCES.
THE PRINCESS IS THE FOURTH IN
THE LINE TO THE THRONE BEHIND
HER GRANDFATHER, PRINCE CHARLES;
HER FATHER, PRINCE WILLIAM; AND
HER 21-MONTH-OLD OLDER BROTHER,
PRINCE GEORGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SOMETHING
DIFFERENT TONIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO USE MOST OF OUR
REMAINING TIME TO OFFER YOU A
DETAILED LOOK AT LIFE IN ONE OF
THE POOREST SECTIONS OF
BALTIMORE.
OUR FOCUS IS ON
SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER, THE
IMPOVERISHED NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE
THERE WAS RIOTING THIS PAST WEEK
FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF FREDDIE
GRAY.
HE GREW UP AND WAS ARRESTED
THERE.
SO LET'S BEGIN "SANDTOWN BY THE
NUMBERS."
IT'S A COMMUNITY OF 14,000
PEOPLE ON BALTIMORE'S WEST SIDE
THAT LIKE SO MANY OTHERS WAS
HARD HIT BY THE LOSS OF
MANUFACTURING JOBS AFTER BIG
COMPANIES LIKE BETHLEHEM STEEL
LEFT TOWN.
THE LATEST AVAILABLE NUMBERS PUT
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IN
SANDTOWN AT MORE THAN 21%,
ABOUT FOUR TIMES THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
ALMOST A THIRD OF THE RESIDENTS
THERE LIVE IN POVERTY; THAT'S
TWICE THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
WE BEGIN BY LOOKING AT HEALTH
CARE IN SANDTOWN.
FOR MORE ABOUT THIS WE ARE
JOINED BY DR. ROBERT BLUM, THE
DIRECTOR OF JOHNS HOPKINS URBAN
HEALTH INSTITUTE.
THE INSTITUTE IS LESS THAN FIVE
MILES AWAY FROM SANDTOWN.
SO, THERE'S THIS PHRASE ABOUT
THIS GENETIC LOTTERY.
WE DON'T CHOOSE WHO WE'RE BORN
TO, RIGHT?
BUT THE INFANT MORTALITY RATE IN
SANDTOWN IS MORE THAN THREE AND
A HALF TIMES THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE, 21 PER 1,000 BIRTHS
COMPARED TO SIX PER THOUSAND
BIRTHS.
FROM THE VERY OUTSET OF LIFE WE
ALREADY SEE A HUGE DISPARITY IN
HEALTH FOR A PERSON BORN THERE
VERSUS THE AVERAGE AMERICAN.
UNPACK THAT FOR US A BIT.
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, JUST TO
PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE, IF
BALTIMORE WERE A COUNTRY, WE
WOULD BE 75th IN THE WORLD
FOR INFANT MORTALITY, BELOW
EVERY INDUSTRIALIZE COUNTRY AND
MANY LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME
COUNTRIES.
WE HAVE PERSISTENT PROBLEMS DUE
TO LACK OF ACCESS TO RESOURCES,
DUE TO PERSISTENT POVERTY, DUE
TO LACK OF EDUCATION, DUE TO
LACK OF OPPORTUNITIES, AND ALL
OF THESE INTERACT TO CREATE AN
ENVIRONMENT WHERE NEITHER
CHILDREN NOR ADULTS THRIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THERE'S
ANOTHER NUMBER WE CAME ACROSS
THAT STRUCK US.
THAT IS LIFE EXPECTANCY IN
SANDTOWN.
IT'S JUST OVER 65 YEARS.
13 YEARS BELOW THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
THAT PUTS PEOPLE THERE ON PAR
WITH FOLKS IN PAKISTAN AND
RAWANDA.
WHAT SHOULD WE MAKE OF THAT?
>> SO WHAT WE HAVE IS A WHOLE
SET OF CONDITIONS.
WE KNOW TODAY THAT ONE'S
ENVIRONMENT, ONE'S CONTEXT DRIVE
THEIR LIFE EXPECTANCY, DRIVE
THEIR HEALTH STATUS, AND TO LIVE
IN AN ENVIRONMENT OF PERSISTENT
POVERTY, WE'RE NOT JUST TALKING
ABOUT ACCESS TO MEDICAL CARE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT ACCESS TO
FOOD, HEALTHY FOOD.
EXERCISE AND RECREATIONAL
PLACES.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT SANITATION.
OUR ENVIRONMENTS IN
SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER IS ONE
EXAMPLE, BUT THERE ARE MANY
COMMUNITIES LIKE THAT IN
BALTIMORE WHERE THE ENTIRE
ENVIRONMENT, BOTH THE PHYSICAL
AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT, IS
TOXIC.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU WROTE IN
THE "WASHINGTON POST," TEENAGERS
IN BALTIMORE FACE POORER HEALTH
AND MORE NEGATIVE OUTLOOKS THAN
THOSE IN URBAN CENTERS OF
NIGERIA AND CHINA."
HOW DOES THIS AFFECT THE
PERCEPTIONS THAT THEY HAVE OF
THE WORLD?
>> THE PERCEPTION THEY HAVE
BECAUSE OF LACK OF OPPORTUNITY,
BECAUSE OF BEING LEFT OUT OF ANY
AMERICAN DREAM IS THAT THERE
ISN'T ANY INSTITUTION THEY
TRUST.
THE FOCUS THIS PAST WEEK HAS
BEEN ON THE POLICE AND LACK OF
TRUST FOR THE POLICE.
BUT THERE'S LACK OF TRUST FOR
EDUCATION, FOR GOVERNMENT, FOR
SOCIAL SERVICES.
THEY DON'T TRUST ANY ADULT
BECAUSE IN FACT MANY OF THEM
REPORT THAT THEY LIVE IN
PERSISTENT FEAR IN HOME, IN
SCHOOL, IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
THEIR LIVES ARE CONSISTENT FEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: FOCUSING IN ON
HEALTH CARE, WHAT KIND OF ACCESS
CHALLENGES ARE THERE IN THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD?
I MEAN, JUST WHEN I WAS THERE IN
THE LAST COUPLE OF DAYS, I MET
SEVERAL OF THESE FOLKS WHO DON'T
HAVE TRANSPORTATION, SO FOR
THEM, EVEN THE BURNED DOWN CVS
WAS A SERIOUS PROBLEM OF WHERE
THEY WERE GOING TO GET THEIR
PRESCRIPTIONS FILLED.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO LACK OF TRANSPORTATION IS A
BIG ISSUE.
LACK OF HEALTHY FOOD IS A HUGE
ISSUE.
MANY PEOPLE IN THESE COMMUNITIES
HAVE TO TRAVEL MILES WITHOUT ANY
TRANSPORTATION TO GET TO A
GROCERY STORE, A GREEN GROCER.
FOR MANY, LACK OF ACCESS TO
HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
THESE ARE COMPOUNDED BY
PERSISTENT TRAUMA THAT PEOPLE IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOODS HAVE.
FOR EXAMPLE, CHILDREN HAVE, ON
AVERAGE, TWO-- EXPERIENCE TWO
ADVERSE CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES.
THIS IS EXTREME VIOLENCE.
APPROXIMATELY 18% SAY THEY HAVE
WITNESSED A RELATIVE OR A FRIEND
OR SOMEONE THEY KNEW HAVING BEEN
SHOT OR KILLED.
SO KIDS GROW UP IN THESE KINDS
OF ENVIRONMENTS, AND THAT KIND
OF TOXIC STRESS TAKES A HUGE
TOLL ON PHYSICAL HEALTH AS WELL
AS MENTAL HEALTH.
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES ARE A
TREMENDOUS SET OF CONCERNS FOR
PEOPLE.
AND IT BECOMES
INTERGENERATIONAL.
IT'S PASSED FROM MOTHER TO CHILD
OR FATHER TO CHILD, NOT
GENETICALLY OR BIOLOGICAL, BUT
SOCIALLY, AND THAT'S THE
CONTEXT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DR. ROBERT BLUM, DIRECTOR OF
JOHNS HOPKINS URBAN HEALTH
INSTITUTE.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: OF COURSE, ALL
WEEK LONG, WE'VE SEEN MANY YOUNG
PEOPLE FROM SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER,
OTHER INNER CITY BALTIMORE
COMMUNITIES ALONG WITH MANY
OTHER CONCERNED CITIZENS
PROTESTING, THE DEATH OF FREDDIE
GRAY AT THE HANDS OF POLICE.
FOR A LOOK AT RELATIONS WITH THE
POLICE, WE ARE JOINED NOW BY
NATASHA PRATT-HARRIS, A Ph.D.,
AN ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF
CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND SOCIOLOGY
AT MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY IN
BALTIMORE.
PROFESSOR, I WANT TO PLAY YOU A
CLIP WE CAME ACROSS THIS WEEK.
IT'S OF A MAN TALKING ABOUT
HOW HE BELIEVES POLICE TREAT
MEN OF COLOR AS SUSPECTS.
>> IT REALLY HURTS WHEN YOU COME
OUT IN THE MORNING AND YOU JUST
CAN'T COME OUT, TAKE DEEP BREATH
AND TAKE A WALK.
YOU CAN'T EVEN TAKE A WALK,
BECAUSE WHEN YOU DO, HALF OF THE
TIMES THEY ARE STARING AT YOU,
THEY ARE LOOKING AT YOU.
YOU GOT SOMETHING PLANNED, IN
THEIR MINDS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THAT A FAIR
DESCRIPTION ABOUT WHAT'S
HAPPENING?
>> I WOULD SAY HE'S SPEAKING HIS
TRUTH.
I ACTUALLY GREW UP IN THE CITY
OF BALTIMORE, ATTENDED PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
I ACTUALLY TEACH IN THE CITY OF
BALTIMORE AT MORGAN STATE
UNIVERSITY.
I HAVE NOT MET A MAN OF COLOR IN
THIS CITY WHO SPENT ANY
SIGNIFICANT TIME IN THE CITY WHO
HASN'T HAD THAT EXPERIENCE, AN
EXPERIENCE THAT WAS IN SOME WAYS
NEGATIVE, SOME NEGATIVE
ENCOUNTER.
SO WHAT HE SAID DOES NOT
SURPRISE ME.
I WILL SAY THAT, YOU KNOW, WE
DON'T NECESSARILY HEAR VOICES
LIKE HIS SHARING WHAT'S
HAPPENED.
SO IT'S WITHOUT A DOUBT A FAIR
DESCRIPTION.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I WANT TO
MAKE CERTAIN IS CLEAR, HOWEVER,
IS THAT IS NOT THE ONLY
EXPERIENCE FOR RESIDENTS OF THE
CITY WHEN IT COMES TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
THERE ARE QUITE A FEW POSITIVE
ENCOUNTERS, BUT THOSE NEGATIVE
ONES OUTWEIGH THE POSITIVE,
SIMILAR TO THIS PAST WEEK.
WE'VE SEEN THE NEGATIVE
DEPICTIONS OF PERSONS WHO WERE
ENGAGED IN VIOLENT CRIMINAL ACTS
AND THOSE NEGATIVE THINGS
OUTWEIGHED THE VERY POSITIVE
THINGS THAT HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUNG MEN ARE
ARRESTED AT A MUCH HIGHER RATE
THAN THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
ACTUALLY, MORE THAN FIVE TIMES
AS OFTEN.
SO HOW DO COMMUNITY RELATIONS,
POLICE RELATIONS SUFFER OR HOW
ARE THEY AFFECTED BY THIS?
>> I WILL KIND OF SPEAK TO WHY
THAT'S HAPPENING.
THERE'S THIS DEBATE THAT THE
RATIONALE BEHIND THAT NUMBER IS
RELATED TO THE INCIDENCES OF
VIOLENCE OR THE RATE BY WHICH
PERSONS ARE ENGAGING CRIMINALLY.
SO THE ONE SIDE OF THE ARGUMENT
IS IF PEOPLE ARE ENGAGING
CRIMINALLY, THEY'RE GOING TO BE
DETAINED.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE ARRESTED BY
LAW ENFORCEMENT.
BUT THE OTHER ARGUMENT IS THAT
THEY HAD MORE CONTACT WITH THE
POLICE.
THAT MEANS THAT POLICE ARE IN
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE
IMPOVERISHED.
THEY ARE ACTUALLY IDENTIFYING
INDIVIDUALS AS ENGAGING
CRIMINALLY.
IF THERE'S MORE CONTACT WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT, THERE'S MORE
LIKELIHOOD OF ENCOUNTER, WHICH
LENDS ITSELF TO CONTAINMENT AND
LATER INCARCERATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
GOING TO BE PEOPLE WHO SAY,
LOOK, THE HOMICIDE RATE IN
SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER IS SO MANY
TIMES THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
DON'T THE PEOPLE LIVING IN THIS
COMMUNITY DESERVE A POLICE
PRESENCE TO PROTECT
THEMSELVES?
I MEAN, WE HAD A DOCTOR ON WHO
TALKED ABOUT HOW MOST KIDS THERE
WITNESS A COUPLE OF TRAUMATIC
EVENTS IN THEIR LIFETIME, WHICH
IS KIND OF SOMETHING THE REST OF
THE COUNTRY DOESN'T CONNECT
WITH.
>> I UNDERSTAND, AND I AGREE
THAT LAW ENFORCEMENT ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR POLICING, BUT
LAW ENFORCEMENT DOESN'T ONLY
HAVE TO ENGAGE IN THE
TRADITIONAL SENSE OF POLICING.
THERE'S SUCH A THING AS
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, AND THE
BALTIMORE CITY POLICE HAS DONE A
FANTASTIC JOB HISTORICALLY IN
ENGAGING WITH THE COMMUNITY.
AND WE ARE FAMILIAR WITH THE
POLICE ATHLETIC LEAGUES WHERE
THEY ENGAGE.
THEY HAD A PRESENCE.
IF YOU ARE ACTUALLY IN THE
PRESENCE AND ENGAGED WITH
MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY, THAT'S
ANOTHER WAY TO POLICE BECAUSE
YOU GET A SENSE OF WHO'S WHO AND
WHO'S ENGAGED IN WHAT ACTIVITY,
SO YOU CAN EITHER QUELL OR JUST
ELIMINATE THE POSSIBILITY OF
SOME CRIMINAL ACTIVITY ENGAGING.
THEN, WHAT WE SEE IS A REACTIVE
TYPE OF POLICING INSTEAD OF
PREVENTION.
WE'RE RESPONDING TO-- I ARGUE--
TO OUR FEAR WHEN WE THINK
ABOUT POLICY, FOR YEARS UNDER
FORMER BALTIMORE MAYOR MARTIN
O'MALLEY, THE CITY INSTITUTE AID
BROKEN WINDOW-STYLE, ZERO
TOLERANCE POLICING AND THEY SAY
CRIME RATES DID DECLINE, LIKE
THEY DID IN MANY BIG CITIES,
INCLUDING NEW YORK.
WHAT ARE THE RIPPLE EFFECTS OF
THAT?
WHY DIDN'T THOSE POLICIES WORK
OR WHAT ARE THE POLICIES THAT
SHOULD BE IMPLEMENTED?
>> WELL, THOSE PARTICULAR
POLICIES I WOULD ARGUE WERE--
THEY WERE EFFECTIVE IN REDUCING
CRIME-- OR THEY MAY HAVE BEEN
EFFECTIVE.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT THERE WERE
STILL PAINS AND TROUBLES AND
PROBLEMS IN THOSE VERY
COMMUNITIES PURPOSE THERE WERE
RESOURCES AND PROGRAMS THAT WERE
CUT AFTER-- OR DURING THE
O'MALLEY ADMINISTRATION WHICH IN
FACT CAN SPEAK TO THE VERY
PROBLEMS THAT WE SEE TODAY.
THERE'S JUST SOME SIMPLE THINGS
THAT WE CAN DO TO ADDRESS
COMMUNITY POLICE RELATIONS.
IT BEGINS WITH HAVING A
CONVERSATION.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, NATASHA
PRATT-HARRIS, ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE
AND SOCIOLOGY AT MORGAN STATE
UNIVERSITY IN BALTIMORE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: WE WANTED TO
TURN NOW TO SOCIAL ASPECTS OF
LIFE IN SANDTOWN.
ESPECIALLY FAMILY LIFE.
FOR MORE ABOUT THAT, WE ARE
JOINED BY TARA HUFFMAN FROM THE
OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE IN
BALTIMORE.
SHE IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE
CRIMINAL AND JUVENILE JUSTICE
PROGRAM.
SO TARA, I WANT TO START BY
PLAYING YOU A CLIP-- AN EXCERPT
OF WHAT PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID
EARLIER THIS WEEK, DESCRIBING
IMPOVERISHED COMMUNITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY THAT HE SAID HE HAD
BEEN STRIPPED OF OPPORTUNITY.
>> WHERE CHILDREN ARE BORN INTO
ABJECT POVERTY; THEY'VE GOT
PARENTS-- OFTEN BECAUSE OF
SUBSTANCE-ABUSE PROBLEMS OR
INCARCERATION OR LACK OF
EDUCATION THEMSELVES-- CAN'T DO
RIGHT BY THEIR KIDS.
COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE ARE NO
FATHERS WHO CAN PROVIDE GUIDANCE
TO YOUNG MEN.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THAT A FAIR
PICTURE OF WHAT LIFE IS LIKE IN
SANDTOWN, WINCHESTER AREA?
>> YES, I WOULD SAY THAT'S A
VERY FAIR PICTURE OF WHAT LIFE
IS LIKE IN SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE HISTORY OF
HOUSING POLICY IN BALTIMORE
CITY, YOU'LL SEE THAT IN THE
1910s AND 20s AND 30s, THERE
WERE A SERIES OF CITY ORDINANCES
AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS AND
RED LINING THAT LOCKED AFRICAN
AMERICAN FAMILIES OUT OF
RESOURCE-RICH NEIGHBORHOODS AND
INTO RESOURCE-POOR
NEIGHBORHOODS.
IN THE 50s, 60s, AND 70s,
THOSE SAME NEIGHBORHOODS WERE
DISPLACED.
UP TO 20,000 FAMILIES DISPLACED
SO THAT THE CITY COULD BUILD NEW
HIGHWAYS AND NEW SCHOOLS AND NEW
HOUSING PROJECTS.
AND THEN CAME THE LOSS OF JOBS
IN THE 1980s, GOOD-PAYING JOBS
THAT DIDN'T REQUIRE A LOT OF
EDUCATION BUT THAT WENT AWAY
WITH THE MANUFACTURING SECTOR.
AND THEN HERE COMES THE 1990s
AND THE 2000s AND THE DRUG WAR
THAT OVER-POLICED,
OVER-CRIMINALIZED AND
OVER-INCARCERATED SCORES OF
AFRICAN AMERICANS, INCLUDING
THOSE IN SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, YOU
BRING UP INCARCERATION.
THE RATES IN THESE AREAS ARE
INCREDIBLY HIGH, ALMOST SEVEN
TIMES THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
HOW DOES THAT PLAY INTO AND
AFFECT THE NOTION OF WHAT WE
CONSIDER A FAMILY OR FAMILY
LIFE?
>> I LIKE TO THINK OF IT SORT OF
AS A JINGA PUZZLE.
IF YOU'RE PLAYING THE GAME OF
JINGA YOU TAKE OUT ONE BLOCK,
THE TOWER STILL STANDS, YOU TAKE
OUT ANOTHER BLOCK, THE TOWER
STILL STANDS, BUT EVENTUALLY YOU
REMOVE TOO MANY BLOCKS AND THE
WHOLE THING COMES CRUMBLING
DOWN.
WHEN YOU PULL OUT TOO MANY
PEOPLE FROM THAT COMMUNITY,
PARTICULARLY TOO MANY AFRICAN
AMERICAN MEN FROM THAT COMMUNITY
AND EXPECT THAT THE COMMUNITY IS
GOING TO BE BETTER, YOUR
APPROACH IS FLAWED.
YOU CANNOT CONTINUE TO
INCARCERATE THAT MANY PEOPLE
FROM A COMMUNITY AND NOT EXPECT
THE COMMUNITY TO SUFFER.
AND THEN AFTER SOME PERIOD OF
TIME, RELEASE THOSE SAME PEOPLE
BACK INTO THAT COMMUNITY BUT NOW
THEY HAVE A CRIMINAL HISTORY
THAT'S GOING TO PREVENT THEM
FROM GETTING EMPLOYMENT, FINDING
DECENT HOUSING, AND BEING
THE KIND OF MEN AND FATHERS AND
BROTHERS AND SONS THAT THEY WANT
TO BE AND THAT EVERYONE EXPECTS
THEM TO BE.
>> Sreenivasan: I WANT TO READ
YOU SOME COMMENTS HERE, ALSO,
FROM RAND PAUL, THE SENATOR AND
ALSO PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE ON
THE PROTEST INVOLVEMENT IN WEEK:
YOUR REACTION TO THAT?
>> WE CANNOT TALK ABOUT
BREAKDOWN OF FAMILIES AND
BREAKDOWN OF THE MORAL CODE
WITHOUT ALSO TALKING ABOUT
GOVERNMENT'S ROLE IN EITHER
INVESTING IN THESE FAMILIES AND
THESE COMMUNITIES OR NOT
THESE COMMUNITIES.
SO IF YOU WANT TO IMPROVE A
SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER, IF YOU WANT
TO PREVENT ANOTHER FREDDIE GRAY,
THEN WHAT IT'S GOING TO TAKE IS
NOT JUST INVESTMENT-- BECAUSE
INVESTMENTS HAVE HAPPENED IN
SANDTOWN/WINCHESTER, BUT THEY'VE
BEEN PIECEMEAL AND THEY'VE BEEN
PILOT PROJECTS, NOT PART OF A
COMPREHENSIVE INVESTMENT
STRATEGY.
AND IT PALES IN COMPARISON TO
THE KINDS OF INVESTMENT WE'VE
SEEN IN OTHER PARTS OF THE CITY,
PARTICULARLY DOWNTOWN AND THOSE
SURROUNDING NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO IF YOU'RE GOING TO INVEST,
THEY HAVE TO BE TARGETED
INVESTMENTS THAT DELIBERATELY
DISMANTLE YEARS OF STRUCTURAL
RACISM AND INEQUALITY IN THOSE
COMMUNITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT
TARA HUFFMANN FROM THE OPEN
SOCIETY INSTITUTE, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK AT LIFE IN SANDTOWN BY THE
NUMBERS.
VIEW THE INFOGRAPHICS ON OUR
WEBSITE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WE RETURN NOW TO
NEPAL WHERE AID HAS SLOWLY
STARTED TO REACH SOME OF THE
MORE REMOTE MOUNTAINOUS AREAS
HIT BY LAST WEEK'S EARTHQUAKE.
ITV'S JONATHAN MILLER REPORTS.
>> Reporter: WE'RE HEADING FOR
THE MOUNTAINTOP VILLAGE OF
PURANOGAU, ONE OF MANY WE'D
HEARD HAD BEEN DESTROYED.
THE TRAIL WAS BLOCKED REPEATEDLY
BY LANDSLIDES.
HOUSES ALONG THE WAY HAD
COLLAPSED, AND A SCHOOL.
"EVERYTHING WAS DESTROYED," THE
BOY SAYS.
BECAUSE IT HIT ON SATURDAY, THE
CHILDREN WEREN'T AT SCHOOL.
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE THE
QUAKE, SOME RELIEF AID WAS
DELIVERED YESTERDAY IN THE SMALL
TOWN AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
MOUNTAIN.
VILLAGERS ARE CARRYING HEAVY
SACKS OF RICE BACK UP.
SUMAN TAMANG WANTED TO SHOW US
HIS HOUSE.
HE'D BEEN A MIGRANT WORKER IN
MALAYSIA AND RUSHED BACK HOME ON
HEARING NEWS OF WHAT HAD
HAPPENED.
HIS AUNT, WHO LIVED NEXT DOOR,
WAS KILLED.
SUMAN HAD SPENT THE PAST THREE
DAYS TRYING TO LOCATE HIS FOUR-
YEAR-OLD SISTER.
HE TOLD ME THAT AT 4:00
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON, HE FINALLY
FOUND HER.
WORKING WITH ANOTHER NEIGHBOR,
SUMAN CAREFULLY DUG OUT HER
LITTLE BODY AND THE FAMILY
QUICKLY CREMATED HER LAST NIGHT.
SO, WHERE IS THE ACTUAL CRACK UP
THERE, WHICH BIT?
THEN, SUMAN TOLD ME SOMETHING
ABOUT THEIR MOUNTAIN WHICH
RENDERS REBUILDING PURANOGAU
IMPOSSIBLE.
>> VERY BIG CRACK IS ALL OVER
THERE.
ANY TIME IT'S HEAVY RAINING OR
AGAIN EARTHQUAKE, IS ANY TIME
CAN FALL.
>> Reporter: THE DISCOVERY OF
THE GAPING FISSURE HAS DEALT A
PARTICULARLY CRUEL BLOW TO
PURANOGAU, NOW TOO DANGEROURS TO
LIVE IN.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
AN EARTHQUAKE THAT STRUCK
TODAY NEAR KALAMAZOO, MICHIGAN,
ALSO REPORTEDLY WAS FELT IN
PARTS OF INDIANA, ILLINOIS,
OHIO AND WISCONSIN.
THE 4.2 MAGNITUDE QUAKE WAS THE
SECOND STRONGEST IN MICHIGAN
HISTORY.
NO INJURIES WERE REPORTED.
AND THE BRITISH MYSTERY AND
CRIME WRITER RUTH RENDELL HAS
DIED.
SHE WROTE MORE THAN 60 NOVELS,
SOME TRANSLATED INTO MORE THAN
20 LANGUAGES AND ADAPTED FOR
TELEVISION AND THE MOVIES.
RUTH RENDALL WAS 85.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
WE'LL HAVE A REPORT ON A GROUP
OF WOMEN SOLDIERS BATTLING ISIS
IN IRAQ.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.